War of the Austrian Succession
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
War of the Austrian Succession
Battle of Fontenoy 1745.PNG
The Battle of Fontenoy by Pierre L'Enfant. Oil on canvas.
Date	16 December 1740 – 18 October 1748
(7 years, 10 months and 2 days)
Location	Europe, North America and the Indian subcontinent
Result	
Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle

Maria Theresa retains the Austrian, Bohemian and Hungarian thrones
Francis of Lorraine, Maria Theresa's husband, confirmed as Holy Roman Emperor
Territorial
changes	
Prussian control of Silesia confirmed.
Duchies of Parma, Piacenza and Guastalla restored to the Spanish Bourbons.
The Austrian Netherlands, seized by France, returned to Austria.
Belligerents
 France
 Prussia (1740–42, 1744–45)
Spain Spain
Bavaria Bavaria (1741–45)
 Saxony (1741–42)
Kingdom of Naples Naples
 Genoa (1745–48)
Sweden Sweden (1741–43)
 Habsburg Monarchy
 Great Britain
Province of Hanover Hanover
 Dutch Republic
 Saxony (1743–45)
 Savoy-Sardinia (1742–48)
 Russia (1741–43, 1748)
Commanders and leaders
Kingdom of France Louis XV of France
Kingdom of France Maurice de Saxe
Kingdom of France Duc de Broglie
Kingdom of France Ulrich Lowendal
Kingdom of Prussia Frederick II
Kingdom of Prussia Leopold I of Anhalt-Dessau
Kingdom of Prussia Leopold II Maximilian
Spain Philip V of Spain
Spain Infante Philip
Spain Count de Gages
Bavaria Emperor Charles VII
Sweden Charles Emil Lewenhaupt
Republic of Genoa Lorenzo de Mari
Habsburg Monarchy Maria Theresa
Habsburg Monarchy Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor
Habsburg Monarchy Ludwig Khevenhüller
Habsburg Monarchy Charles Alexander
Habsburg Monarchy Otto von Traun
Kingdom of Great BritainProvince of Hanover George II (personal union)
Kingdom of Great Britain Sir Robert Walpole
Kingdom of Great Britain Lord Wilmington
Kingdom of Great Britain Henry Pelham
Kingdom of Great Britain Prince William, Duke of Cumberland
Kingdom of Great Britain Thomas Mathews
Kingdom of Great Britain Edward Braddock
Dutch Republic Prince of Waldeck
Electorate of Saxony Frederick Augustus II
Electorate of Saxony Count Rutowsky
Kingdom of Sardinia Charles Emmanuel III
Russian Empire Elizabeth I
Russian Empire Peter Lacy
[show] v t e
War of the Austrian Succession
[show] v t e
War of the
Austrian Succession:
Italian Campaigns
[show] v t e
War of the
Austrian Succession
Sea battles
[show] v t e
War of Jenkins' Ear
[show] v t e
King George's War
[show] v t e
First Carnatic War
[show] v t e
Anglo-French wars
The War of the Austrian Succession (German: Österreichischer Erbfolgekrieg, 1740–1748) involved most of the powers of Europe over the question of Maria Theresa's succession to the Habsburg Monarchy. The war included King George's War in British America, the War of Jenkins' Ear (which formally began on 23 October 1739), the First Carnatic War in India, the Jacobite rising of 1745 in Scotland, and the First and Second Silesian Wars.

The war began under the pretext that Maria Theresa was ineligible to succeed to the Habsburg thrones of her father, Charles VI, because Salic law precluded royal inheritance by a woman. In practice, this was an excuse put forward by the Kingdoms of France and Prussia, joined by the Electorate of Bavaria, to challenge Habsburg power. Maria Theresa was supported by the Kingdom of Great Britain and the Dutch Republic, the traditional enemies of France, as well as the Kingdom of Sardinia and the Electorate of Saxony.

Spain, which had been at war with Britain over colonies and trade since 1739, entered the war on the Continent to re-establish its influence in northern Italy, further reversing Austrian dominance over the Italian peninsula that had been achieved at Spain's expense as a consequence of Spain's war of succession earlier in the 18th century.

The war ended with the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748, by which Maria Theresa was confirmed as Archduchess of Austria and Queen of Hungary, but Prussia retained control of Silesia. The peace was soon to be shattered, however, when Austria's desire to recapture Silesia intertwined with the political upheaval in Europe, culminating in the Seven Years' War (1756–1763).

Contents  [hide] 
1	Background
2	Strategies
3	Silesian Campaign of 1740
4	Allies in Bohemia 1741
5	Campaigns of 1742
6	Campaign of 1743
7	Campaign of 1744
8	Campaign of 1745
9	Italian Campaigns 1741–47
10	Later campaigns
11	Conclusion of the war
12	General character of the war in Europe
13	North America
14	India
15	Naval operations
15.1	The West Indies
15.2	The Mediterranean
15.3	Northern waters
15.4	The Indian Ocean
16	Related wars
17	Gallery
18	See also
19	References
19.1	Notes
20	Further reading
Background[edit]

Europe in the years after the Treaty of Vienna (1738), with the Habsburg Monarchy in gold
The immediate cause of the War of the Austrian Succession was the death in 1740 of the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles VI, and the inheritance of Hapsburg lands in Austria, Hungary, Croatia, the Netherlands, Bohemia and Italy (often collectively referred to as 'Austria').

When Charles succeeded his elder brother Joseph I in 1711, he was the last male Hapsburg heir in the direct line; this meant their lands would be divided on his death as Salic law prevented women inheriting in their own right. A family issue became a European one due to tensions within the Holy Roman Empire, whose monarch was officially chosen by seven prince-electors. The Thirty Years' War of 1618-48 divided the Empire into Protestant and Catholic regions, substantially weakening the bonds holding it together, while by the mid 18th century states like Bavaria, Prussia and Saxony had increased dramatically in both size and power. The same was also true of the Hapsburgs, who now viewed the title of Emperor as being hereditary in practice if not principle (Sigismund the last non-Hapsburg Emperor ruled from 1368-1437.) These centrifugal forces led to a war that reshaped the traditional European balance of power; the various legal claims were largely pretexts and seen as such.[1]

The Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 secured the integrity of the Hapsburg inheritance by allowing a female successor, a principle approved by the various Hapsburg territories, the Imperial Diet, Spain, Russia, Prussia, Britain and France.[2] However, when his own daughter Maria Theresa was born in 1717, Charles had disinherited his two nieces Maria Josepha and Maria Amalia, married respectively to the rulers of Bavaria and Saxony who now refused to be bound by the decision of the Imperial Diet. In addition, despite publicly agreeing to the Pragmatic Sanction in 1735, France then signed a secret treaty with Bavaria in 1738 promising to back the 'just claims' of Charles Albert of Bavaria.[3]

Charles responded by supporting first the claim of Augustus, Elector of Saxony to the Polish throne in the War of the Polish Succession, then more disastrously Russia in the Russo-Turkish War of 1735–1739. The losses of men, money and territory in these two conflicts of low strategic value weakened Austria at exactly the wrong time, while Charles also failed to prepare Maria Theresa for her new role, excluding her from any role in government. Many diplomats and statesmen were sceptical Austria could survive the widely anticipated contest that would follow Charles' death, which finally occurred in October 1740.[4]

Strategies[edit]

All the participants of the War of the Austrian Succession. Blue: Austria, Great Britain, the United Provinces with allies. Green: Prussia, Spain, France with allies.
For much of the eighteenth century, France approached its wars in the same way: It would either let its colonies defend themselves, or would offer only minimal help (sending them only limited numbers of troops or inexperienced soldiers), anticipating that fights for the colonies would likely be lost anyway.[5] This strategy was, to a degree, forced upon France: geography, coupled with the superiority of the British navy, made it difficult for the French navy to provide significant supplies and support to French colonies.[6] Similarly, several long land borders made an effective domestic army imperative for any ruler of France.[7] Given these military necessities, the French government, unsurprisingly, based its strategy overwhelmingly on the army in Europe: it would keep most of its army on the European continent, hoping that such a force would be victorious closer to home.[7] At the end of the War of Austrian Succession, France gave back its European conquests, while recovering such lost overseas possessions as Louisbourg, largely restoring the status quo ante as far as France was concerned.[8]

The British—by inclination as well as for pragmatic reasons—had tended to avoid large-scale commitments of troops on the Continent.[9] They sought to offset the disadvantage this created in Europe by allying themselves with one or more Continental powers whose interests were antithetical to those of their enemies, particularly France. In the War of the Austrian Succession, the British were allied with Austria; by the time of the Seven Years' War, they were allied with its enemy, Prussia. In marked contrast to France, Britain strove to actively prosecute the war in the colonies once it became involved in the war, taking full advantage of its naval power.[10] The British pursued a dual strategy of naval blockade and bombardment of enemy ports, and also utilized their ability to move troops by sea to the utmost.[11] They would harass enemy shipping and attack enemy outposts, frequently using colonists from nearby British colonies in the effort. This plan worked better in North America than in Europe, but set the stage for the Seven Years' War.

Silesian Campaign of 1740[edit]
Further information: First Silesian War

Maria Theresa, Queen regnant of Hungary and Bohemia and Archduchess of Austria, Holy Roman Empress
Prussia in 1740 was an emerging power, a small but well-organized state whose new king, Frederick II, wanted to unify the disparate and scattered holdings of his crown by gathering intervening lands into a unified, contiguous state. Prince Frederick was 28 years old when he ascended to the throne on 31 May 1740 upon the death of his father, Frederick William I.[12] Although Prussia and Austria had been allies in the War of the Polish Succession (1733–1738), concluded only two years before, the interests of the two countries diverged when the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles VI, died on 20 October 1740. Neither Frederick nor his father had ever been fond of Austria and its various snubs against Prussia (such as offering them the duchies of Julich and Berg in return for an alliance, only to renege later).[13]

Rejecting the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713, Frederick opportunistically invaded Silesia on 16 December 1740.[14] In support of his invasion, Frederick used a questionable interpretation of a treaty (1537) between the Hohenzollerns and the Piasts of Brieg as a pretext. What Frederick really feared was that other princes of Europe were preparing to exploit the succession struggle to acquire Habsburg possessions for themselves and/or diminish the power of the Holy Roman Empire. In particular, Frederick feared that Augustus III, Elector of Saxony and King of Poland, was preparing to seize Silesia for himself to unite Saxony and Poland.[15]

The only recent combat experience of the Prussian Army was their participation in the War of the Polish Succession (Rhine campaign of 1733–1735), in which the Prussians had largely been kept out of combat. Nobody in the Habsburg court trusted the motives of the new rising power of Prussia and, therefore,[citation needed] the Holy Roman Emperor did not call on the Prussians, who were vassals[dubious – discuss] of the Holy Roman Empire, for military support of the Empire. Accordingly, the Prussian Army had an uninspiring reputation and was counted as one of the many minor armies of the Holy Roman Empire. This reputation misrepresented the fact of a standing army of 80,000 soldiers, representing 4% of the 2.2 million population of Prussia.[16] Thus the Prussian Army was disproportionate to the size of the state it protected. By comparison, the Austrian Empire had 16 million citizens but had an army only half its authorised size because of financial restraints. Thus, in defending the vast territory of the Austrian Empire this small army was more of "a sieve"[17] than a shield against foreign invasion.


Lands of the Bohemian Crown until 1742 when most of Silesia was ceded to Prussia
Moreover, the Prussian army was better trained than other armies in Europe and was led by an excellent officer corps. King Frederick William I and "the guiding genius of the Prussian Army",[18] Leopold I, Prince of Anhalt-Dessau or "Old Dessauer", had drilled the Prussian Army to a perfection previously unknown in Europe. The Prussian infantry soldier was so well-trained and well-equipped that he could fire 5 shots a minute to an Austrian's 3 shots per minute; and while Prussian cavalry and artillery were comparatively less efficient, they were still of better quality than average. Furthermore, while the Austrians had to wait for conscription to complete the field forces, Prussian regiments took the field at once. With this army it might not have been surprising that Frederick was able to overrun Silesia. However, Frederick sought even more advantages in the war he was planning. Accordingly, he had his Foreign Minister—Heinrich von Podewils—secretly negotiate a treaty with France to put Austria in a two front war. In this way, Prussia could attack the Austrians in the east while France would attack Austria from the west. A treaty with France was signed in April 1739.[19]

In early December, Frederick assembled his army along the Oder river and on 16 December, without a formal declaration of war, the Prussians invaded Silesia. For most of the previous century, Austria's military resources had been concentrated in Hungary and Italy, countering threats from the Ottomans and Spanish respectively, while neglecting less vulnerable areas. As a result, the Austrians had fewer than 3,000 troops available to defend Silesia, and although this was increased to 7,000 shortly before the Prussian attack, they could only hold the fortresses of Glogau, Breslau, and Brieg, abandoning the rest of the province and retreating into Moravia, at which point both sides went into winter quarters.[20] Prussia now controlled most of the single richest province in the Hapsburg Empire (Silesian taxes provided 10% of total Imperial income), with a population of over one million, the major commercial centre of Breslau and large mining, weaving and dyeing industries.[21] However, Frederick had hoped to avoid a long war by rapidly capturing all of Silesia, presenting Maria Theresa with a fait accompli, in exchange for which Prussia would guarantee the Hapsburgs' other German territories; Austria's retention of its fortresses in Southern Silesia and the failure of Prussian diplomatic efforts to persuade powers like Britain and Russia to agree meant a quick victory could not be achieved.[22]

Allies in Bohemia 1741[edit]

Frederick II of Prussia
Early in the year, a new Austrian field army under General Wilhelm Reinhard von Neipperg relieved Neisse and marched on Brieg, threatening to cut the Prussians off. On 10 April, Frederick's army caught the Austrians on the snow-covered fields near Mollwitz.[23] This was the first time that Frederick had led troops into battle.[24] The victory that Frederick attained at the Battle of Mollwitz was a learning experience for the young King, who departed from the field just before his troops routed the Austrians; both his tactics and his cavalry were rather clumsy, and victory was only obtained due to the discipline of the Prussian infantry and their veteran commander, Field Marshall Kurt von Schwerin.[25]

Frederick obtained an alliance with the French against the Austrians, signing the Treaty of Breslau on 5 June.[26][27] Accordingly, the French began to cross the Rhine on 15 August[27] and joined the Bavarian Elector's forces on the Danube and advanced towards Vienna.[28] The combined forces of the French and the Bavarians captured the Austrian town of Linz on 14 September.[27][28] However, at this point, the objective was suddenly changed, and after many countermarches the anti-Austrian allies advanced, in three widely separated corps, on Prague. A French corps moved via Amberg and Pilsen. The Elector marched on Budweis, and the Saxons (who had now joined the allies against Austria[28]) invaded Bohemia by the Elbe valley. The Austrians could at first offer little resistance, but before long a considerable force intervened at Tábor between the Danube and the allies, and Austrian troops including Neipperg were soon transferred from Silesia back to the west to defend the Austrian capital, Vienna, from the French.

With fewer Austrian troops in Silesia Frederick now had an easier time. The remaining fortresses in Silesia were taken by the Prussians.[26] Before he left Silesia, Austrian General Neipperg had made a curious agreement with Frederick, the so-called Klein–Schnellendorf agreement (9 October 1741). By this agreement, the fortress at Neisse was surrendered after a mock siege, and the Prussians agreed to let the Austrians leave unmolested releasing Neipperg's army for service elsewhere.[29] At the same time the Hungarians, moved to enthusiasm by the personal appeal, in September 1741, of Maria Theresia,[30] had put into the field a levée en masse, or "insurrection," which furnished the regular army with an invaluable force of 60,000 more light troops.[31] A fresh army was collected under Field Marshal Khevenhüller at Vienna, and the Austrians planned an offensive winter campaign against the Franco-Bavarian forces in Bohemia and the small Bavarian army that remained on the Danube to defend the electorate.

Meanwhile, the Saxon-born Maurice de Saxe and a small French force stormed Prague on 26 November 1741. Francis Stephen, husband of Maria Theresa, who commanded the Austrians in Bohemia, moved too slowly to save the fortress. The Elector of Bavaria, who now styled himself Archduke of Austria, was crowned King of Bohemia (9 December 1741) and elected to the imperial throne as Charles VII (24 January 1742), but no active measures were undertaken.

In Bohemia the month of December was occupied in mere skirmishes. On the Danube, Khevenhüller, the best general in the Austrian service, advanced on 27 December, swiftly drove back the allies, shut them up in Linz, and pressed on into Bavaria.[32] Munich itself surrendered to the Austrians on the coronation day of Charles VII.

At the close of this first act of the campaign the French, under the old Marshal de Broglie, maintained a precarious foothold in central Bohemia, menaced by the main army of the Austrians, and Khevenhüller was ranging unopposed in Bavaria. Frederick made a secret truce with Austria and thus, lay inactive in Silesia.

Campaigns of 1742[edit]

Prince Charles Alexander of Lorraine
Frederick had hoped by the truce to secure Silesia, for which alone he was fighting; although allied with the French, he had no wish to see them become the dominant power in Germany through the destruction of Austria. For their part, the French had aspirations to divide most of the Habsburg territories between themselves, Prussia, Bavaria and Saxony. But with the successes of Khevenhüller and the enthusiastic "insurrection" of Hungary, Maria Theresa's opposition became firmer, and she divulged the provisions of the truce, to compromise Frederick with his allies. The war recommenced. Frederick had not rested idle on his laurels. In the uneventful summer campaign of 1741 he had found time to begin the reorganisation of his cavalry. The training of the Prussian cavalry had been neglected by Frederick's father—King Frederick William I.[33] Probably because he himself was an infantryman to his core, the training of the cavalry had also been overlooked by the "Old Dessauer" who was the true genius behind the Prussian Army.[33] Frederick had been disappointed by the performance of his cavalry at the Battle of Mollwitz.[34] However, as a result of Frederick's training over the summer of 1741 the Prussian cavalry would soon acquit themselves much better in the coming battles of the First Silesian War. Before long the cavalry would be more efficient than the Prussian infantry.[citation needed]

The Bavarian Emperor Charles VII, whose territories were overrun by the Austrians, asked him to create a diversion by invading Moravia. In December 1741, therefore, the Prussian general field marshal Kurt Christoph Graf von Schwerin crossed the border and captured Olmutz. Glatz also was invested, and the Prussian army was concentrated about Olomouc in January 1742. A combined plan of operations was made by the French, Saxons and Prussians for the rescue of Linz. But Linz soon fell. Broglie on the Vltava, weakened by the departure of the Bavarians to oppose Khevenhüller, and of the Saxons to join forces with Frederick, was in no condition to take the offensive, and large forces under Prince Charles of Lorraine lay in his front from Budweis to Jihlava (Iglau). Frederick's march was made towards Iglau in the first place. Brno was invested about the same time (February), but the direction of the march was changed, and instead of moving against Prince Charles, Frederick pushed on southwards by Znojmo and Mikulov. The extreme outposts of the Prussians appeared before Vienna. But Frederick's advance was a mere foray, and Prince Charles, leaving a screen of troops in front of Broglie, marched to cut off the Prussians from Silesia, while the Hungarian levies poured into Upper Silesia by the Jablunkov Pass. The Saxons, discontented and demoralised, soon marched off to their own country, and Frederick with his Prussians fell back by Svitavy and Litomyšl to Kutná Hora in Bohemia, where he was in touch with Broglie on the one hand and (Glatz having now surrendered) with Silesia on the other. No defence of Olomouc was attempted, and the small Prussian corps remaining in Moravia fell back towards Upper Silesia.

Prince Charles marched past Jihlava and Teutsch (Deutsch) Brod on Kutná Hora in pursuit of Frederick. On 17 May 1742 Frederick turned around and faced the Austrian forces that were pursuing him.[35] He fought the Austrians in what has become known as the Battle of Chotusitz. After a severe struggle Frederick won a major Prussian victory. At Chotusitz, it was Frederick's newly reorganised and trained cavalry that really won the victory[36] and compensated for their previous failings. The cavalry's conduct gave an earnest prospect of its future glory, not only by its charges on the battlefield, but by its vigorous pursuit of the defeated Austrians.

Almost at the same time the Battle of Chotusitz was occurring, French Field Marshal François Broglie fell upon a part of the Austrians left on the Vltava and won a small, but morally and politically important, success in the action of Sahay, near Budweis (24 May 1742). Frederick did not propose another combined movement. Frederick's victory at Chotusitz, along with the victory of Field Marshal Broglie, persuaded Maria Theresa to seek peace even if it meant ceding away Silesia to make good her position elsewhere.[24] Accordingly, a separate peace between Prussia and Austria was signed at Breslau on 11 June 1742, which drew the First Silesian War to a close.[37] However, the larger War of the Austrian Succession continued.

Campaign of 1743[edit]
The year 1743 opened disastrously for the forces of the new Holy Roman Emperor, Charles VII. The French and Bavarian armies were not working well together, and Field Marshal Broglie had been placed in command of the allied army in Bavaria.[38] This created tension between Broglie and the Bavarian commanders. Broglie openly quarrelled with the Bavarian field marshal Friedrich Heinrich von Seckendorff. No connected resistance was offered to the converging march of Prince Charles's army along the Danube, Khevenhüller from Salzburg towards southern Bavaria, and Prince Lobkowitz from Bohemia towards the Naab. The Bavarians, under the command of Count Minuzzi, suffered a severe reverse at the town of Simbach near Braunau on 9 May 1743 at the hands of Prince Charles of Lorraine.[39]


George II of Great Britain
Now an Anglo-Allied army commanded by King George II retreated down the Main River to the village of Hanau.[40] This army had been formed on the lower Rhine upon the withdrawal of the French (Westphalian) Army under the command of the Marquis de Maillebois. This allied army became known as the "Pragmatic Army," because it was drawn from a confederation of states that supported the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713, which made Maria Theresa sole heir of the Habsburg territories. The Pragmatic Army had been advancing southward up the Main into Neckar country prior to this retreat in the summer of 1743. A French army, under Marshal Noailles, was being collected on the middle Rhine to deal with this new force. Marshal Noailles correctly anticipated that given the problems faced by the Pragmatic Army, George II would take the entire Pragmatic Army back down the Main.[41] Marshal Noailles made plans to lay a trap for the Pragmatic Army and destroy it. However, Marshal Noailles's ally Marshal Broglie was now in full retreat. Strong places of Bavaria were surrendered one after the other to Prince Charles. Marshal Noailles's French army, however, was still intent on finding victory while Marshal de Broglie's Franco-Bavarian army was retreating towards France. In the Dettingen, Noailles attempted a daring maneuver to envelop the British army but his subordinate the Duke de Gramont, without orders, attacked the Pragmatic Army and was defeated with heavy casualties.[42]

King Frederick of Prussia was terrified by the defeat at Dettingen.[43] Frederick saw that he now faced a coalition of potential rivals that included Austria, Britain and Russia.[43] However, Frederick soon realised that the coalition against him was not as strong as it first appeared. Neither Austria nor the British knew how to exploit their victory at Dettingen.[43] Marshal Noailles was driven almost to the Rhine by King George. The French and Bavarian army had been completely outmanoeuvred and was in a position of the greatest danger between Aschaffenburg and Hanau in the defile formed by the Spessart Hills and the river Main. Yet the Pragmatic Army did not quickly follow up the attack. Thus, Marshal Noailles had time to block the outlet and had posts all around. At this point, the allied troops had to force their way through the French and Bavarian lines. Still, because of the heavy losses inflicted on the French, the Battle of Dettingen and the follow up is justly reckoned as a notable victory of Anglo-Austrian-Hanoverian arms.

The coalition against Frederick was suddenly weakened when the St. Petersburg court discovered a plot to overthrow Tsarina Elisabeth and bring back the child Ivan VI as Tsar, with his mother Grand Duchess Anna Leopoldovna serving as regent for the child.[43] Matters were made much worse for the allies against Frederick when an Austrian envoy Antoniotto Botta Adorno was found to be intimately involved in the plot. Indeed, the plot became known as the "Botta Conspiracy."[44] The Botta-attempted coup redounded badly not only against Austria, but also against the Saxon and British courts.[43] Frederick's initial indifference to a treaty with Russia now changed to enthusiasm in the light of the fallout from the Botta Conspiracy.[45]

Marshal Broglie, worn out by age and exertions, was soon replaced by Marshal Coigny.[46] Both Broglie and Noailles were now on the strict defensive behind the Rhine. Not a single French soldier remained in Germany, and Prince Charles prepared to force the passage of the Rhine river in the Breisgau while George II, King of Britain, moved forward via Mainz to co-operate by drawing upon himself the attention of both the French marshals. The Anglo-allied army took Worms, but after several unsuccessful attempts to cross the Rhine river, Prince Charles went into winter quarters. The king followed his example, drawing his troops to the north, to deal, if necessary, with the army which the French were collecting on the frontier of the Southern Netherlands. Austria, Britain, the Dutch Republic and Sardinia were now allied. Saxony changed sides and the entry of Sweden had offset the loss of Russia to the allies. Thus, Sweden and Russia neutralised each other (Peace of Åbo, August 1743). Frederick was still quiescent. France, Spain and Bavaria actively continued the struggle against Maria Theresa.

While the Battle of Dettingen and Russian Botta plot were capturing all the attention during the summer of 1743, negotiations between the British, the Austrians and Sardinians were proceeding quietly in the city of Worms.[47] The Austrians were desperately afraid that Frederick II would soon be invading the Austrian domains again. Thus, the Austrians sought a separate peace with Sardinia in Italy. Under the terms of the Treaty of Worms, which was signed on 13 September 1743, the Austrian Habsburgs surrendered all territory in Italy located west of the Ticino River and Lake Maggiore to Sardinia.[48] Additionally some lands south of the Po River were also given to Sardinia.[49] In exchange, Sardinia renounced its claim to Milan, guaranteed the Pragmatic Sanction and agreed to provide 40,000 troops for a joint Italian army to fight the Bourbons.
